# Overview

This is a synth that generates waveforms by adding sines together.

It can be inefficient to generate waveforms this way for low frequencies, but it's fun and easy to understand. It's also quite easy to avoid aliasing.

Ring modulation can be applied on each of the sines to change the sound's texture. This produces an effect similar to subtracting two waveforms that are offset in frequency. 

A shaped "amplitude boost" that emulates a sharp filter cutoff can also be swept along the waveform.

Voices aren't used for polyphony like many other synths; instead each voice is a combined ADSR envelope and LFO that
can modulate the global parameters on a sample-rate basis.

The voices can also be paired with a "master" voice. The master voice then further modulates the ADSR/LFO parameters of the paired voice.

# Generation equation

Three classic synth waveforms can be generated by summing sines according to the following equations:

```
saw
j=1 -1**j * 1/j * sin(2*pi*j*f*t)

square
j=1 1/(2*j-1) * sin(2*pi*(2*j-1)*f*t)

tri
j=0 -1**j * (2*j+1) * sin(2*pi*j*f*t)
```

This synth uses a unified equation that can cover all the above cases, as follows:

	j=start powbase**(j*expmul) * (scalemul*j+scaleoff)**scaleexp * sin(2*pi*(scalemul*j+scaleoff)*f*t)
	
By configuring the parameters correctly, this equation can generate each of the above waveforms, and maybe some other interesting ones besides.

Lowpass, highpass and filter resonance can also be emulated by changing the right parameters.

# Other notes

There is state retained for each overtone, and the state isn't updated when the overtones aren't used, i.e. when max overtones is reduced, or when an overtone exceeds the frequency max or undershoots zero. The phase of the ring modulated sines of those overtones can the "de-correlate" from the other sines, which can give it a noisy character until the state is re-synced manually or on the next note. This is a CPU-saving measure that can be disabled via preferences.

# Some notes on performance

GCC is generally very good at vectorising loops when `-ffast-math` and `-ftree-loop-vectorize` is enabled, but for the important loops I'm often using the vector types and builtins just to be sure that they are being vectorized.

Julien Pommier's SSE math functions were even faster than GCC's trig function vectorisation. The biggest speed gain came from this.

I tried an implementation using look up tables to generate sines, and even without interpolation it was only about as fast as the version using SSE sines.

An example of how to examine generated assembly code to see how much has been vectorised:

	gcc -DHAVE_CONFIG_H -I. -I.. -pthread -I../buzztrax-stable/include -I/usr/include/gstreamer-1.0 -I/usr/include/glib-2.0 -I/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/glib-2.0/include -O2 -ffast-math -lm -ftree-loop-vectorize -std=gnu99 -Werror -Wno-error=unused-variable -Wall -Wshadow -Wpointer-arith -Wstrict-prototypes -fvisibility=hidden -g -fPIC -DPIC -Wa,-adhln ../src/additive.c
	
I.e. copy the build command that `make` generates and add `-Wa,-adhln`.

Ultimately, I replaced Julien's SSE function with functions from the Cephes library converted to use GCC's vectorisation feature, and I found that the performance was just as good. Cephes was also the source for Julien's functions.

Disabling denormal floats gave a minor performance boost.

Using v4sf consts instead of float literals in vectorised code made no difference -- the compiler is smart enough to choose the best representation and isn't creating overhead in converting vectors back and forth.

In inner loops, it's still generally better to avoid heavy computation using branches rather than trying to avoid all branching.

Striping the buffers for the "s-rate" control parameters provided no benefit, and neither did calculating all overtones for each sample before moving to the next sample (instead of calculating all samples for each overtone before moving to the next overtone.) The process doesn't really seem bound by memory accesses, or the data fits in the cache anyway.
